---
id: 3426
title: To Our Partners In City Hall
date: 2011-02-01T16:46:37+00:00
author: Jennifer Pahlka
excerpt: 'Today, the first class of Code for America fellows start their month-long residencies in your cities. Having just spent an amazing month with all of them in San Francisco (where we all experienced the first ever <a href="http://codeforamerica.org/category/cfa-institute/">CfA Training</a>), I think you’re in for a treat. I thought I’d write a short note about the Fellows’ progress so far and what to look forward to in the month ahead. We think you’ll find the first class of fellows to be a talented, committed, mission-driven group.  From the first hours they spent in our office, it was apparent what brought them together for this program: a belief in Code for America’s vision and a genuine desire for public service. '
layout: post
guid: http://codeforamerica.org/?p=3426
permalink: /2011/02/01/to-our-partners-in-city-hall/
dsq_thread_id:
  - 220347071
categories:
  - Dispatches
  - News
---
Dear partners in City Hall,

Today, the first class of Code for America fellows start their month-long residencies in your cities. Having just spent an amazing month with all of them in San Francisco (where we all experienced the first ever [CfA Training](http://codeforamerica.org/category/cfa-institute/)), I think you’re in for a treat. I thought I’d write a short note about the Fellows’ progress so far and what to look forward to in the month ahead.

We think you’ll find the first class of fellows to be a talented, committed, mission-driven group.  From the first hours they spent in our office, it was apparent what brought them together for this program: a belief in Code for America’s vision and a genuine desire to serve their country. The twenty fellows come from a wide variety of backgrounds and experiences, but they’ve quickly found that special sauce called teamwork because of what they have in common: they’ve each left careers, consulting practices, homes, and loved ones for the chance to use their skills to make a difference.

But the skills they bring to this fellowship (programming, design, project management, communications, etc.) may not always be the skills that are needed to do the job, and I’m proud that CfA Training focused not on technical skill development or even tool sets, but on seeing different perspectives and gaining support for their objectives from everyone they can. Their focus during the month of February is to learn, building their understanding of how city government works from every department, and conducting in depth research with the target users of their projects. They’ve honed their interview skills through trainings with the remarkable [David Eaves](http://codeforamerica.org/author/david), the masters of user-driven design at [Cooper](http://www.cooper.com/), and people like [Caterina Fake](http://caterina.net/), creator of products we love. They’re going to do a lot of listening this month; they are charged with coming home with no less than one hundred interviews! [Andrew Greenhill](http://codeforamerica.org/who-we-are/#agreenhill), a CfA board member and chief of staff for the Mayor of Tucson, summed it up perfectly on Day 3, as he was leaving. He said “When I go home my wife will ask me, “So, are they here to code? Or are they here to help? Are they willing to do what it takes? And I can answer honestly that they are, and they will.”

So don’t expect that the fellows will arrive today and begin writing lines of code for some big software project that we believe will solve all your problems. That’s not our model. The whole Code for America program is built around a different approach to solving problems, one that leverages existing tools, understands how cities and citizens interact now, and builds off of that understanding. We want to find lightweight, creative solutions that cities can easily sustain and grow on their own. Don’t be fooled by our name: in many ways, the code comes last.

But perhaps you’ve heard the Code for America Fellows have already been coding up little fixes for cities? This is true, and important to note as you enter February with them. Let me share a story with you as an example of the kinds of quick fixes the Fellows can help with.  The morning of January 12, Nigel Jacob in Boston City Hall sent the following message:

> “Hi CFA team &#8211; Boston is currently in the middle of a blizzard! We are exploring a possible partnership with GroundCrew, called SnowCrew, which will enable citizens-volunteers to self-organize around snow shoveling for their neighbours.  We need a quick piece of work done that I&#8217;m sure a CFA fellow or two can crank out pretty quickly. … We need to convert this output [of our Open311 API] to KML so … GroundCrew can post it to the site.”

Nigel sent this message at 7:51 am. At 5:55 pm CfA Fellow Talin Salway sent a message with a link to the data output in GeoRSS format. The Boston team was able to use SnowCrew.

Let me be clear: you have a team of geeks at your disposal. **Use them** (within reason). Obviously, they must also have enough time to work on their assigned projects and learn what they need to learn this month, but I have seen first hand how much this team loves to fix problems. In Nigel’s case, he knew exactly what needed to be done, but you can also share with the fellows problems to which you don’t see an apparent solution, and see what they come up with. Or you may know of something in your department or elsewhere that doesn’t work optimally; is data being re-entered multiple times somewhere? Maybe our fellows can connect two databases and free up cycles for city staff to work directly with citizens. It doesn’t necessarily need to be code, either. They may know of a free or cheap cloud-based tool that’s perfect for the job at hand, or they may just be able to show you that thing that’s been stumping you about Twitter. Whatever it is, we hope you’ll use this month when the Fellows are sharing your space to understand where they can help. Build that relationship with them, and then you can call on them for technical help throughout the year, even when they are back here in San Francisco.

The one thing the fellows are most nervous about is their projects. There are so many unanswered questions for them about expectations, tools, stakeholders, and constraints, and their intense desire to succeed throws those unknowns into stark relief. The next month for them is about gaining enormous amounts of context; we expect there will be few easy answers. By challenging assumptions, balancing needs, and listening hard, we expect these agile, inquisitive teams will use the skills they’ve honed during their January training to find creative solutions.  But they won’t be sharing a product design this month. Give them time to follow the process, to do their interviews, and begin planning after they have as full a picture as possible. We’ve enlisted the fantastic folks at [Pivotal Labs](http://pivotallabs.com/) to help us with the process of turning all this research into actionable to-dos when the Fellows return in March. Their job this month, and yours, is to make sure the channels of communication and trust are dug deep and clear. We’ll all need those channels throughout the year.

Lastly, I want to thank each of you in Boston, the District of Columbia, Philadelphia, and Seattle for embarking on this journey with us. As Nigel rightfully pointed out, getting this program approved and contracted was the first big win in each of our cities – no easy task in an era of shrinking budgets and heightened scrutiny, especially because Code for America doesn’t fit neatly into a procurement bucket. Your dedication and faith in this process is as remarkable, as necessary, and as appreciated as the commitment the Fellows have made; it is the fuel that will drive our collective mission forward. During January, the Fellows bonded with each other as a team. Now they will make new connections, and create a new team, built of city staffers and fellows &#8212; personifying the collaboration we’re all betting on.

Thank you, and enjoy “Fellows February!”